---
id: restart-4d
title: RESTART 4D
slug: /commands/restart-4d
displayed_sidebar: docs
---

<!--REF #_command_.RESTART 4D.Syntax-->**RESTART 4D** {( *time* {; *message*} )}<!-- END REF-->
<!--REF #_command_.RESTART 4D.Params-->
| Parameter | Type |  | Description |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| time | Integer | &#8594;  | Time delay (seconds) before 4D restarts |
| message | Text | &#8594;  | Text to display on client machines |

<!-- END REF-->

#### Description 

<!--REF #_command_.RESTART 4D.Summary-->The **RESTART 4D** command restarts the current 4D application.<!-- END REF--> 

This command is mainly intended for use in the context of a merged application (client/server or single-user) and in conjunction with the [SET UPDATE FOLDER](set-update-folder.md) command. In this case, the automatic update process is launched: the new version of the application designated by [SET UPDATE FOLDER](set-update-folder.md) automatically replaces the current version at the time of the restart resulting from **RESTART 4D**. The pathname of the data file is saved and used automatically. 

If no update information was specified using the [SET UPDATE FOLDER](set-update-folder.md) command in the current session, the command simply restarts the 4D application with the current structure and data files. 

You can use the *time* parameter to defer restarting the application in order to give client machines time to disconnect. You must pass a value in seconds for the *time*. If you omit this parameter, the server application waits, for a maximum of 10 minutes, for all the client applications to be disconnected. After that, all client applications are automatically disconnected. 

**Note:** The *time* and *message* parameters are only taken into account with server applications (they are ignored if the command is executed in a single-user or remote application). 

The optional *message* parameter displays a custom message for connected client applications. 

If the command is executed correctly, the OK system variable is set to 1; otherwise, it is set to 0 and the application restarts. You can intercept any errors generated by the command using a method installed using the [ON ERR CALL](on-err-call.md) command. 

#### See also 

[Get last update log path](get-last-update-log-path.md)  
[SET UPDATE FOLDER](set-update-folder.md)  

#### Properties

|  |  |
| --- | --- |
| Command number | 1292 |
| Thread safe | &check; |
| Modifies variables | OK, error |


