versioned_docs/version-19/Concepts/classes.md, before:

---
id: classes
title: Classes
---


## Overview

The 4D language supports the concept of **classes**. In a programming language, using a class allows you to define an object behaviour with associated properties and functions.

Once a user class is defined, you can **instantiate** objects of this class anywhere in your code. Each object is an instance of its class. A class can [`extend`](#class-extends-classname) another class, and then inherits from its [functions](#function).

> The class model in 4D is similar to classes in JavaScript, and based on a chain of prototypes.

For example, you could create a `Person` class with the following definition:

```4d  
//Class: Person.4dm
Class constructor($firstname : Text; $lastname : Text)
 This.firstName:=$firstname
 This.lastName:=$lastname
 
Function sayHello()->$welcome : Text
 $welcome:="Hello "+This.firstName+" "+This.lastName
```

In a method, creating a "Person":

```
var $person : cs.Person //object of Person class  
var $hello : Text
$person:=cs.Person.new("John";"Doe")
// $person:{firstName: "John"; lastName: "Doe" }
$hello:=$person.sayHello() //"Hello John Doe"
```

## Managing classes

### Class definition

A user class in 4D is defined by a specific method file (.4dm), stored in the `/Project/Sources/Classes/` folder. The name of the file is the class name.

When naming classes, you should keep in mind the following rules:

- A [class name](identifiers.md#classes) must be compliant with [property naming rules](identifiers.md#object-properties).
- Class names are case sensitive.
- Giving the same name to a class and a database table is not recommended, in order to prevent any conflict.

For example, if you want to define a class named "Polygon", you need to create the following file:

- Project folder
  - Project
    - Sources
      - Classes
        - Polygon.4dm

### Deleting a class

To delete an existing class, you can:

- on your disk, remove the .4dm class file from the "Classes" folder,
- in the 4D Explorer, select the class and click ![](../assets/en/Users/MinussNew.png) or choose **Move to Trash** from the contextual menu.

### Using 4D interface

Class files are automatically stored at the appropriate location when created through the 4D interface, either via the **File** menu or the Explorer.

#### File menu and toolbar

You can create a new class file for the project by selecting **New > Class...** in the 4D Developer **File** menu or from the toolbar.

You can also use the **Ctrl+Shift+Alt+k** shortcut.

#### Explorer

In the **Methods** page of the Explorer, classes are grouped in the **Classes** category.

To create a new class, you can:

- select the **Classes** category and click on the ![](../assets/en/Users/PlussNew.png) button.
- select **New Class...** from the action menu at the bottom of the Explorer window, or from the contexual menu of the Classes group.
![](../assets/en/Concepts/newClass.png)
- select **New > Class...** from the contexual menu of the Explorer's Home page.

#### Class code support

In the various 4D windows (code editor, compiler, debugger, runtime explorer), class code is basically handled like a project method with some specificities:

- In the code editor:
  - a class cannot be run
  - a class function is a code block
  - **Goto definition** on an object member searches for class Function declarations; for example, "$o.f()" will find "Function f".
  - **Search references** on class function declaration searches for the function used as object member; for example, "Function f" will find "$o.f()".
- In the Runtime explorer and Debugger, class functions are displayed with the `\<ClassName>` constructor or `\<ClassName>.\<FunctionName>` format.

## Class stores

Available classes are accessible from their class stores. Two class stores are available:

- `cs` for user class store
- `4D` for built-in class store

### cs

#### cs -> classStore

|Parameter|Type||Description|
|---|---|---|---|
|classStore|object|<-|User class store for the project or component|

The `cs` command returns the user class store for the current project or component. It returns all user classes [defined](#class-definition) in the opened project or component. By default, only project [ORDA classes](ORDA/ordaClasses.md) are available.

#### Example

You want to create a new instance of an object of `myClass`:

```4d
$instance:=cs.myClass.new()
```

### 4D

#### 4D -> classStore

|Parameter|Type||Description|
|---|---|---|---|
|classStore|object|<-|4D class store|

The `4D` command returns the class store for available built-in 4D classes. It provides access to specific APIs such as [CryptoKey](API/CryptoKeyClass.md).

#### Example

You want to create a new key in the `CryptoKey` class:

```4d
$key:=4D.CryptoKey.new(New object("type";"ECDSA";"curve";"prime256v1"))
```

## Class object

When a class is [defined](#class-definition) in the project, it is loaded in the 4D language environment. A class is an object itself, of ["Class" class](API/ClassClass.md). A class object has the following properties and function:

- [`name`](API/ClassClass.md#name) string
- [`superclass`](API/ClassClass.md#superclass) object (null if none)
- [`new()`](API/ClassClass.md#new) function, allowing to instantiate class objects.

In addition, a class object can reference a [`constructor`](#class-constructor) object (optional).

A class object is a [shared object](shared.md) and can therefore be accessed from different 4D processes simultaneously.

### Inheritance

If a class inherits from another class (i.e. the [Class extends](classes.md#class-extends-classname) keyword is used in its definition), the parent class is its [`superclass`](API/ClassClass.md#superclass).

When 4D does not find a function or a property in a class, it searches it in its [`superclass`](API/ClassClass.md#superclass); if not found, 4D continues searching in the superclass of the superclass, and so on until there is no more superclass (all objects inherit from the "Object" superclass).

## Class keywords

Specific 4D keywords can be used in class definitions:

- `Function <Name>` to define class functions of the objects.
- `Class constructor` to define the properties of the objects.
- `Class extends <ClassName>` to define inheritance.

### Function

#### Syntax

```4d
Function <name>({$parameterName : type; ...}){->$parameterName : type}
// code
```

Class functions are specific properties of the class. They are objects of the [4D.Function](API/FunctionClass.md#about-4dfunction-objects) class.

In the class definition file, function declarations use the `Function` keyword, and the name of the function. The function name must be compliant with [property naming rules](Concepts/identifiers.md#object-properties).

> **Tip:** Starting the function name with an underscore character ("_") will exclude the function from the autocompletion features in the 4D code editor. For example, if you declare `Function _myPrivateFunction` in `MyClass`, it will not be proposed in the code editor when you type in `"cs.MyClass. "`.

Immediately following the function name, [parameters](#parameters) for the function can be declared with an assigned name and data type, including the return parameter (optional). For example:

```4d
Function computeArea($width : Integer; $height : Integer)->$area : Integer
```

Within a class function, the `This` command is used as the object instance. For example:

```4d  
Function setFullname($firstname : Text; $lastname : Text)
 This.firstName:=$firstname
 This.lastName:=$lastname

Function getFullname()->$fullname : Text
 $fullname:=This.firstName+" "+Uppercase(This.lastName)
```
  
For a class function, the `Current method name` command returns: `<ClassName>.<FunctionName>`, for example "MyClass.myMethod".

In the application code, class functions are called as member methods of the object instance and can receive [parameters](#class-function-parameters) if any. The following syntaxes are supported:

- use of the `()` operator. For example, `myObject.methodName("hello")`
- use of a "4D.Function" class member method:
  - [`apply()`](API/FunctionClass.md#apply)
  - [`call()`](API/FunctionClass.md#call)

> **Thread-safety warning:** If a class function is not thread-safe and called by a method with the "Can be run in preemptive process" attribute:
>
> - the compiler does not generate any error (which is different compared to regular methods),
> - an error is thrown by 4D only at runtime.

#### Parameters

Function parameters are declared using the parameter name and the parameter type, separated by a colon. The parameter name must be compliant with [property naming rules](Concepts/identifiers.md#object-properties). Multiple parameters (and types) are separated by semicolons (;).

```4d  
Function add($x; $y : Variant; $z : Integer; $xy : Object)
```

>If the type is not stated, the parameter will be defined as `Variant`.

You declare the return parameter (optional) by adding an arrow (`->`) and the return parameter definition after the input parameter(s) list. For example:

```4d
Function add($x : Variant; $y : Integer)->$result : Integer
```

You can also declare the return parameter only by adding `: type`, in which case it will automatically be available through $0. For example:

```4d
Function add($x : Variant; $y : Integer): Integer
 $0:=$x+$y
```

The [classic 4D syntax](parameters.md#sequential-parameters) for method parameters can be used to declare class function parameters. Both syntaxes can be mixed. For example:

```4d
Function add($x : Integer)
 var $2; $value : Integer
 var $0 : Text
 $value:=$x+$2
 $0:=String($value)
```

#### Example

```4d
// Class: Rectangle
Class constructor($width : Integer; $height : Integer)
 This.name:="Rectangle"
 This.height:=$height
 This.width:=$width

// Function definition
Function getArea()->$result : Integer
 $result:=(This.height)*(This.width)
```

```4d
// In a project method

var $rect : cs.Rectangle
var $area : Real

$rect:=cs.Rectangle.new(50;100)  
$area:=$rect.getArea() //5000
```

### Class constructor

#### Syntax

```4d
// Class: MyClass
Class Constructor({$parameterName : type; ...})
// code
```

A class constructor function, which can accept [parameters](#parameters), can be used to define a user class.  

In that case, when you call the [`new()`](API/ClassClass.md#new) function, the class constructor is called with the parameters optionally passed to the `new()` function.

For a class constructor function, the `Current method name` command returns:  `<ClassName>:constructor`, for example "MyClass:constructor".

#### Example

```4d
// Class: MyClass
// Class constructor of MyClass
Class Constructor ($name : Text)
 This.name:=$name
```

```4d
// In a project method
// You can instantiate an object
var $o : cs.MyClass
$o:=cs.MyClass.new("HelloWorld")  
// $o = {"name":"HelloWorld"}
```

### Class extends `\<ClassName>`

#### Syntax

```4d
// Class: ChildClass
Class extends <ParentClass>
```

The `Class extends` keyword is used in class declaration to create a user class which is a child of another user class. The child class inherits all functions of the parent class.

Class extension must respect the following rules:

- A user class cannot extend a built-in class (except 4D.Object and [ORDA classes](../ORDA/ordaClasses.md) which are extended by default for user classes).
- A user class cannot extend a user class from another project or component.
- A user class cannot extend itself.
- It is not possible to extend classes in a circular way (i.e. "a" extends "b" that extends "a").

Breaking such a rule is not detected by the code editor or the interpreter, only the compiler and `check syntax` will throw an error in this case.

An extended class can call the constructor of its parent class using the [`Super`](#super) command.

#### Example

This example creates a class called `Square` from a class called `Polygon`.

```4d
//Class: Square

//path: Classes/Square.4dm 

Class extends Polygon


Class constructor ($side : Integer)
 
 // It calls the parent class's constructor with lengths
 // provided for the Polygon's width and height
 Super($side;$side)
 // In derived classes, Super must be called before you
 // can use 'This'
 This.name:="Square"

 Function getArea()
  C_LONGINT($0)
  $0:=This.height*This.width
```

### Super

#### Syntax

```4d
Super {( param{;...;paramN} )} {-> Object} 
```

|Parameter|Type||Description|  
|---|---|---|---|
|param|mixed|->|Parameter(s) to pass to the parent constructor
|Result|object|<-|Object's parent|

The `Super` keyword allows calls to the `superclass`, i.e. the parent class.

`Super` serves two different purposes:

1. Inside a [constructor code](#class-constructor), `Super` is a command that allows to call the constructor of the superclass. When used in a constructor, the `Super` command appears alone and must be used before the `This` keyword is used.

- If all class constructors in the inheritance tree are not properly called, error -10748 is generated. It's 4D developer to make sure calls are valid.
- If the `This` command is called on an object whose superclasses have not been constructed, error -10743 is generated.
- If `Super` is called out of an object scope, or on an object whose superclass constructor has already been called, error -10746 is generated.

```4d
// inside myClass constructor
var $text1; $text2 : Text
Super($text1) //calls superclass constructor with a text param
This.param:=$text2 // use second param
```

2. Inside a [class member function](#class-function), `Super` designates the prototype of the superclass and allows to call a function of the superclass hierarchy.

```4d
Super.doSomething(42) //calls "doSomething" function  
//declared in superclasses
```

#### Example 1

This example illustrates the use of `Super` in a class constructor. The command is called to avoid duplicating the constructor parts that are common between `Rectangle` and `Square` classes.

```4d
// Class: Rectangle
Class constructor($width : Integer; $height : Integer)
 This.name:="Rectangle"
 This.height:=$height
 This.width:=$width

 
Function sayName()
 ALERT("Hi, I am a "+This.name+".")
 
// Function definition
Function getArea()
 var $0 : Integer
 $0:=(This.height)*(This.width)
```

```4d
//Class: Square
 
Class extends Rectangle
 
Class constructor ($side : Integer)
 
 // It calls the parent class's constructor with lengths
 // provided for the Rectangle's width and height
 Super($side;$side)
 // In derived classes, Super must be called before you
 // can use 'This'
 This.name:="Square"

Function getArea()
 C_LONGINT($0)
 $0:=This.height*This.width
```

#### Example 2

This example illustrates the use of `Super` in a class member method. You created the `Rectangle` class with a function:

```4d
//Class: Rectangle
 
Function nbSides()
 var $0 : Text
 $0:="I have 4 sides"
```

You also created the `Square` class with a function calling the superclass function:

```4d
//Class: Square
 
Class extends Rectangle
 
Function description()
 var $0 : Text
 $0:=Super.nbSides()+" which are all equal"
```

Then you can write in a project method:

```4d
var $square : Object
var $message : Text
$square:=cs.Square.new()
$message:=$square.description() //I have 4 sides which are all equal
```

### This

#### Syntax

```4d
This -> Object
```

|Parameter|Type||Description|  
|---|---|---|---|
|Result|object|<-|Current object|

The `This` keyword returns a reference to the currently processed object. In 4D, it can be used in [different contexts](https://doc.4d.com/4Dv18/4D/18/This.301-4504875.en.html).

In most cases, the value of `This` is determined by how a function is called. It can't be set by assignment during execution, and it may be different each time the function is called.

When a formula is called as a member method of an object, its `This` is set to the object the method is called on. For example:

```4d
$o:=New object("prop";42;"f";Formula(This.prop))
$val:=$o.f() //42
```

When a [class constructor](#class-constructor) function is used (with the [`new()`](API/ClassClass.md#new) function), its `This` is bound to the new object being constructed.

```4d
//Class: ob
  
Class Constructor  
 
 // Create properties on This as
 // desired by assigning to them
 This.a:=42 
```

```4d
// in a 4D method  
$o:=cs.ob.new()
$val:=$o.a //42
```

> When calling the superclass constructor in a constructor using the [Super](#super) keyword, keep in mind that `This` must not be called before the superclass constructor, otherwise an error is generated. See [this example](#example-1).

In any cases, `This` refers to the object the method was called on, as if the method were on the object.

```4d
//Class: ob
  
Function f()
 $0:=This.a+This.b
```

Then you can write in a project method:

```4d
$o:=cs.ob.new()
$o.a:=5
$o.b:=3
$val:=$o.f() //8
```

In this example, the object assigned to the variable $o doesn't have its own *f* property, it inherits it from its class. Since *f* is called as a method of $o, its `This` refers to $o.

## Class commands

Several commands of the 4D language allows you to handle class features.

### OB Class

#### OB Class ( object ) -> Object | Null

`OB Class` returns the class of the object passed in parameter.

### OB Instance of

#### OB Instance of ( object ; class ) -> Boolean

`OB Instance of` returns `true` if `object` belongs to `class` or to one of its inherited classes, and `false` otherwise.

Commit message:

no end class keyword - for ia

versioned_docs/version-19/Concepts/classes.md, after:

---
id: classes
title: Classes
---


## Overview

The 4D language supports the concept of **classes**. In a programming language, using a class allows you to define an object behaviour with associated properties and functions.

Once a user class is defined, you can **instantiate** objects of this class anywhere in your code. Each object is an instance of its class. A class can [`extend`](#class-extends-classname) another class, and then inherits from its [functions](#function).

> The class model in 4D is similar to classes in JavaScript, and based on a chain of prototypes.

For example, you could create a `Person` class with the following definition:

```4d  
//Class: Person.4dm
Class constructor($firstname : Text; $lastname : Text)
 This.firstName:=$firstname
 This.lastName:=$lastname
 
Function sayHello()->$welcome : Text
 $welcome:="Hello "+This.firstName+" "+This.lastName
```

In a method, creating a "Person":

```
var $person : cs.Person //object of Person class  
var $hello : Text
$person:=cs.Person.new("John";"Doe")
// $person:{firstName: "John"; lastName: "Doe" }
$hello:=$person.sayHello() //"Hello John Doe"
```

## Managing classes

### Class definition

A user class in 4D is defined by a specific method file (.4dm), stored in the `/Project/Sources/Classes/` folder. The name of the file is the class name.

When naming classes, you should keep in mind the following rules:

- A [class name](identifiers.md#classes) must be compliant with [property naming rules](identifiers.md#object-properties).
- Class names are case sensitive.
- Giving the same name to a class and a database table is not recommended, in order to prevent any conflict.

For example, if you want to define a class named "Polygon", you need to create the following file:

- Project folder
  - Project
    - Sources
      - Classes
        - Polygon.4dm

### Deleting a class

To delete an existing class, you can:

- on your disk, remove the .4dm class file from the "Classes" folder,
- in the 4D Explorer, select the class and click ![](../assets/en/Users/MinussNew.png) or choose **Move to Trash** from the contextual menu.

### Using 4D interface

Class files are automatically stored at the appropriate location when created through the 4D interface, either via the **File** menu or the Explorer.

#### File menu and toolbar

You can create a new class file for the project by selecting **New > Class...** in the 4D Developer **File** menu or from the toolbar.

You can also use the **Ctrl+Shift+Alt+k** shortcut.

#### Explorer

In the **Methods** page of the Explorer, classes are grouped in the **Classes** category.

To create a new class, you can:

- select the **Classes** category and click on the ![](../assets/en/Users/PlussNew.png) button.
- select **New Class...** from the action menu at the bottom of the Explorer window, or from the contexual menu of the Classes group.
![](../assets/en/Concepts/newClass.png)
- select **New > Class...** from the contexual menu of the Explorer's Home page.

#### Class code support

In the various 4D windows (code editor, compiler, debugger, runtime explorer), class code is basically handled like a project method with some specificities:

- In the code editor:
  - a class cannot be run
  - a class function is a code block
  - **Goto definition** on an object member searches for class Function declarations; for example, "$o.f()" will find "Function f".
  - **Search references** on class function declaration searches for the function used as object member; for example, "Function f" will find "$o.f()".
- In the Runtime explorer and Debugger, class functions are displayed with the `\<ClassName>` constructor or `\<ClassName>.\<FunctionName>` format.

## Class stores

Available classes are accessible from their class stores. Two class stores are available:

- `cs` for user class store
- `4D` for built-in class store

### cs

#### cs -> classStore

|Parameter|Type||Description|
|---|---|---|---|
|classStore|object|<-|User class store for the project or component|

The `cs` command returns the user class store for the current project or component. It returns all user classes [defined](#class-definition) in the opened project or component. By default, only project [ORDA classes](ORDA/ordaClasses.md) are available.

#### Example

You want to create a new instance of an object of `myClass`:

```4d
$instance:=cs.myClass.new()
```

### 4D

#### 4D -> classStore

|Parameter|Type||Description|
|---|---|---|---|
|classStore|object|<-|4D class store|

The `4D` command returns the class store for available built-in 4D classes. It provides access to specific APIs such as [CryptoKey](API/CryptoKeyClass.md).

#### Example

You want to create a new key in the `CryptoKey` class:

```4d
$key:=4D.CryptoKey.new(New object("type";"ECDSA";"curve";"prime256v1"))
```

## Class object

When a class is [defined](#class-definition) in the project, it is loaded in the 4D language environment. A class is an object itself, of ["Class" class](API/ClassClass.md). A class object has the following properties and function:

- [`name`](API/ClassClass.md#name) string
- [`superclass`](API/ClassClass.md#superclass) object (null if none)
- [`new()`](API/ClassClass.md#new) function, allowing to instantiate class objects.

In addition, a class object can reference a [`constructor`](#class-constructor) object (optional).

A class object is a [shared object](shared.md) and can therefore be accessed from different 4D processes simultaneously.

### Inheritance

If a class inherits from another class (i.e. the [Class extends](classes.md#class-extends-classname) keyword is used in its definition), the parent class is its [`superclass`](API/ClassClass.md#superclass).

When 4D does not find a function or a property in a class, it searches it in its [`superclass`](API/ClassClass.md#superclass); if not found, 4D continues searching in the superclass of the superclass, and so on until there is no more superclass (all objects inherit from the "Object" superclass).

## Class keywords

Specific 4D keywords can be used in class definitions:

- `Function <Name>` to define class functions of the objects.
- `Class constructor` to define the properties of the objects.
- `Class extends <ClassName>` to define inheritance.

### Function

#### Syntax

```4d
Function <name>({$parameterName : type; ...}){->$parameterName : type}
// code
```

:::note

There is no ending keyword for function code. The 4D language automatically detects the end of a function's code by the next `Function` keyword or the end of the class file. 

:::


Class functions are specific properties of the class. They are objects of the [4D.Function](API/FunctionClass.md#about-4dfunction-objects) class.

In the class definition file, function declarations use the `Function` keyword, and the name of the function. The function name must be compliant with [property naming rules](Concepts/identifiers.md#object-properties).

> **Tip:** Starting the function name with an underscore character ("_") will exclude the function from the autocompletion features in the 4D code editor. For example, if you declare `Function _myPrivateFunction` in `MyClass`, it will not be proposed in the code editor when you type in `"cs.MyClass. "`.

Immediately following the function name, [parameters](#parameters) for the function can be declared with an assigned name and data type, including the return parameter (optional). For example:

```4d
Function computeArea($width : Integer; $height : Integer)->$area : Integer
```

Within a class function, the `This` command is used as the object instance. For example:

```4d  
Function setFullname($firstname : Text; $lastname : Text)
 This.firstName:=$firstname
 This.lastName:=$lastname

Function getFullname()->$fullname : Text
 $fullname:=This.firstName+" "+Uppercase(This.lastName)
```
  
For a class function, the `Current method name` command returns: `<ClassName>.<FunctionName>`, for example "MyClass.myMethod".

In the application code, class functions are called as member methods of the object instance and can receive [parameters](#class-function-parameters) if any. The following syntaxes are supported:

- use of the `()` operator. For example, `myObject.methodName("hello")`
- use of a "4D.Function" class member method:
  - [`apply()`](API/FunctionClass.md#apply)
  - [`call()`](API/FunctionClass.md#call)

> **Thread-safety warning:** If a class function is not thread-safe and called by a method with the "Can be run in preemptive process" attribute:
>
> - the compiler does not generate any error (which is different compared to regular methods),
> - an error is thrown by 4D only at runtime.

#### Parameters

Function parameters are declared using the parameter name and the parameter type, separated by a colon. The parameter name must be compliant with [property naming rules](Concepts/identifiers.md#object-properties). Multiple parameters (and types) are separated by semicolons (;).

```4d  
Function add($x; $y : Variant; $z : Integer; $xy : Object)
```

>If the type is not stated, the parameter will be defined as `Variant`.

You declare the return parameter (optional) by adding an arrow (`->`) and the return parameter definition after the input parameter(s) list. For example:

```4d
Function add($x : Variant; $y : Integer)->$result : Integer
```

You can also declare the return parameter only by adding `: type`, in which case it will automatically be available through $0. For example:

```4d
Function add($x : Variant; $y : Integer): Integer
 $0:=$x+$y
```

The [classic 4D syntax](parameters.md#sequential-parameters) for method parameters can be used to declare class function parameters. Both syntaxes can be mixed. For example:

```4d
Function add($x : Integer)
 var $2; $value : Integer
 var $0 : Text
 $value:=$x+$2
 $0:=String($value)
```

#### Example

```4d
// Class: Rectangle
Class constructor($width : Integer; $height : Integer)
 This.name:="Rectangle"
 This.height:=$height
 This.width:=$width

// Function definition
Function getArea()->$result : Integer
 $result:=(This.height)*(This.width)
```

```4d
// In a project method

var $rect : cs.Rectangle
var $area : Real

$rect:=cs.Rectangle.new(50;100)  
$area:=$rect.getArea() //5000
```

### Class constructor

#### Syntax

```4d
// Class: MyClass
Class Constructor({$parameterName : type; ...})
// code
```

:::note

There is no ending keyword for class constructor function code. The 4D language automatically detects the end of a function's code by the next `Function` keyword or the end of the class file. 

:::


A class constructor function, which can accept [parameters](#parameters), can be used to define a user class.  

In that case, when you call the [`new()`](API/ClassClass.md#new) function, the class constructor is called with the parameters optionally passed to the `new()` function.

For a class constructor function, the `Current method name` command returns:  `<ClassName>:constructor`, for example "MyClass:constructor".

#### Example

```4d
// Class: MyClass
// Class constructor of MyClass
Class Constructor ($name : Text)
 This.name:=$name
```

```4d
// In a project method
// You can instantiate an object
var $o : cs.MyClass
$o:=cs.MyClass.new("HelloWorld")  
// $o = {"name":"HelloWorld"}
```

### Class extends `\<ClassName>`

#### Syntax

```4d
// Class: ChildClass
Class extends <ParentClass>
```

The `Class extends` keyword is used in class declaration to create a user class which is a child of another user class. The child class inherits all functions of the parent class.

Class extension must respect the following rules:

- A user class cannot extend a built-in class (except 4D.Object and [ORDA classes](../ORDA/ordaClasses.md) which are extended by default for user classes).
- A user class cannot extend a user class from another project or component.
- A user class cannot extend itself.
- It is not possible to extend classes in a circular way (i.e. "a" extends "b" that extends "a").

Breaking such a rule is not detected by the code editor or the interpreter, only the compiler and `check syntax` will throw an error in this case.

An extended class can call the constructor of its parent class using the [`Super`](#super) command.

#### Example

This example creates a class called `Square` from a class called `Polygon`.

```4d
//Class: Square

//path: Classes/Square.4dm 

Class extends Polygon


Class constructor ($side : Integer)
 
 // It calls the parent class's constructor with lengths
 // provided for the Polygon's width and height
 Super($side;$side)
 // In derived classes, Super must be called before you
 // can use 'This'
 This.name:="Square"

 Function getArea()
  C_LONGINT($0)
  $0:=This.height*This.width
```

### Super

#### Syntax

```4d
Super {( param{;...;paramN} )} {-> Object} 
```

|Parameter|Type||Description|  
|---|---|---|---|
|param|mixed|->|Parameter(s) to pass to the parent constructor
|Result|object|<-|Object's parent|

The `Super` keyword allows calls to the `superclass`, i.e. the parent class.

`Super` serves two different purposes:

1. Inside a [constructor code](#class-constructor), `Super` is a command that allows to call the constructor of the superclass. When used in a constructor, the `Super` command appears alone and must be used before the `This` keyword is used.

- If all class constructors in the inheritance tree are not properly called, error -10748 is generated. It's 4D developer to make sure calls are valid.
- If the `This` command is called on an object whose superclasses have not been constructed, error -10743 is generated.
- If `Super` is called out of an object scope, or on an object whose superclass constructor has already been called, error -10746 is generated.

```4d
// inside myClass constructor
var $text1; $text2 : Text
Super($text1) //calls superclass constructor with a text param
This.param:=$text2 // use second param
```

2. Inside a [class member function](#class-function), `Super` designates the prototype of the superclass and allows to call a function of the superclass hierarchy.

```4d
Super.doSomething(42) //calls "doSomething" function  
//declared in superclasses
```

#### Example 1

This example illustrates the use of `Super` in a class constructor. The command is called to avoid duplicating the constructor parts that are common between `Rectangle` and `Square` classes.

```4d
// Class: Rectangle
Class constructor($width : Integer; $height : Integer)
 This.name:="Rectangle"
 This.height:=$height
 This.width:=$width

 
Function sayName()
 ALERT("Hi, I am a "+This.name+".")
 
// Function definition
Function getArea()
 var $0 : Integer
 $0:=(This.height)*(This.width)
```

```4d
//Class: Square
 
Class extends Rectangle
 
Class constructor ($side : Integer)
 
 // It calls the parent class's constructor with lengths
 // provided for the Rectangle's width and height
 Super($side;$side)
 // In derived classes, Super must be called before you
 // can use 'This'
 This.name:="Square"

Function getArea()
 C_LONGINT($0)
 $0:=This.height*This.width
```

#### Example 2

This example illustrates the use of `Super` in a class member method. You created the `Rectangle` class with a function:

```4d
//Class: Rectangle
 
Function nbSides()
 var $0 : Text
 $0:="I have 4 sides"
```

You also created the `Square` class with a function calling the superclass function:

```4d
//Class: Square
 
Class extends Rectangle
 
Function description()
 var $0 : Text
 $0:=Super.nbSides()+" which are all equal"
```

Then you can write in a project method:

```4d
var $square : Object
var $message : Text
$square:=cs.Square.new()
$message:=$square.description() //I have 4 sides which are all equal
```

### This

#### Syntax

```4d
This -> Object
```

|Parameter|Type||Description|  
|---|---|---|---|
|Result|object|<-|Current object|

The `This` keyword returns a reference to the currently processed object. In 4D, it can be used in [different contexts](https://doc.4d.com/4Dv18/4D/18/This.301-4504875.en.html).

In most cases, the value of `This` is determined by how a function is called. It can't be set by assignment during execution, and it may be different each time the function is called.

When a formula is called as a member method of an object, its `This` is set to the object the method is called on. For example:

```4d
$o:=New object("prop";42;"f";Formula(This.prop))
$val:=$o.f() //42
```

When a [class constructor](#class-constructor) function is used (with the [`new()`](API/ClassClass.md#new) function), its `This` is bound to the new object being constructed.

```4d
//Class: ob
  
Class Constructor  
 
 // Create properties on This as
 // desired by assigning to them
 This.a:=42 
```

```4d
// in a 4D method  
$o:=cs.ob.new()
$val:=$o.a //42
```

> When calling the superclass constructor in a constructor using the [Super](#super) keyword, keep in mind that `This` must not be called before the superclass constructor, otherwise an error is generated. See [this example](#example-1).

In any cases, `This` refers to the object the method was called on, as if the method were on the object.

```4d
//Class: ob
  
Function f()
 $0:=This.a+This.b
```

Then you can write in a project method:

```4d
$o:=cs.ob.new()
$o.a:=5
$o.b:=3
$val:=$o.f() //8
```

In this example, the object assigned to the variable $o doesn't have its own *f* property, it inherits it from its class. Since *f* is called as a method of $o, its `This` refers to $o.

## Class commands

Several commands of the 4D language allows you to handle class features.

### OB Class

#### OB Class ( object ) -> Object | Null

`OB Class` returns the class of the object passed in parameter.

### OB Instance of

#### OB Instance of ( object ; class ) -> Boolean

`OB Instance of` returns `true` if `object` belongs to `class` or to one of its inherited classes, and `false` otherwise.
