---
id: get-last-error-stack
title: GET LAST ERROR STACK
slug: /commands/get-last-error-stack
displayed_sidebar: docs
---

<!--REF #_command_.GET LAST ERROR STACK.Syntax-->**GET LAST ERROR STACK** ( *codesArray* ; *intCompArray* ; *textArray* )<!-- END REF-->
<!--REF #_command_.GET LAST ERROR STACK.Params-->
| Parameter | Type |  | Description |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| codesArray | Integer array | &harr; | Error numbers |
| intCompArray | Text array | &harr; | Internal component codes |
| textArray | Text array | &harr; | Text of errors |

<!-- END REF-->

#### Description 

<!--REF #_command_.GET LAST ERROR STACK.Summary-->The **GET LAST ERROR STACK** command returns information about the current stack of errors of the 4D application.<!-- END REF--> When a 4D statement causes an error, the current error stack contains a description of the error as well as any series of errors generated. For example, a "disk full" type error causes a write error in the file then an error in the record saving command: the stack will therefore contain three errors. If the last 4D statement did not generate an error, the current error stack is empty.

This generic command can be used to process any type of error that may occur in the 4D application. 

**Note:** However, to obtain detailed information concerning the errors generated by an ODBC source, it will be necessary to use the [SQL GET LAST ERROR](sql-get-last-error.md) command.

This command must be called from an on error call method installed by the [ON ERR CALL](on-err-call.md) command.

The information is returned in three synchronized arrays:

* *codesArray*: This array receives the list of error codes generated.
* *intCompArray*: This array contains the codes of the internal components associated with each error.
* *textArray*: This array contains the text of each error.

The list of error codes and their text is provided in the sections of the *Error Codes* theme.

#### See also 

[Last errors](last-errors.md)  
[ON ERR CALL](on-err-call.md)  
[SQL GET LAST ERROR](sql-get-last-error.md)  